Gödel and the limits of logic
John W Dawson

https://plus.maths.org/content/godel-and-limits-logic

The man in the photograph on the right looks formal, reserved and somewhat undernourished. 
His face and his writings are unfamiliar to most, except for a few philosophers and mathematical logicians. 
He was Kurt Gödel, celebrated for his incompleteness theorems, the implications of which are far-reaching for 
the foundations of mathematics and computer science. The story of his life and work is that of a persistent 
quest for rationality in all things, pursued against a background of recurrent mental instability.

Gödel proved that the mathematical methods in place since the time of Euclid (around 300 BC) were inadequate 
for discovering all that is true about the natural numbers. His discovery undercut the foundations on which 
mathematics had been built up to the 20th century, stimulated thinkers to seek alternatives and generated a 
lively philosophical debate about the nature of truth. Gödel's innovative techniques, which could readily be
applied to algorithms for computations, also laid the foundation for modern computer science.

Mr Why
Born on April 28, 1906, in Brno, Moravia, Gödel was the second of two children of Rudolf and Marianne Gödel, 
expatriate Germans whose families were associated with the city's textile industry. Gödel and his brother were
both sent to private German language schools, where they did very well in their studies.

Indeed, only once during his primary and secondary school career did young Kurt ever receive less than the 
highest mark in any subject (mathematics!). Yet he gave no early intimation of genius. He was a highly 
inquisitive child, so much so that he was nicknamed der Herr Warum ("Mr. Why"). But he was also introverted, 
sensitive and somewhat sickly. At about the age of eight he contracted rheumatic fever, and although it 
seems not to have caused lasting physical damage, it kept him out of school for some time and may have fostered
the exaggerated concern for his health and diet that was to become increasingly prominent over the years.

The reticent genius
In 1924 Gödel left his homeland to enrol at the University of Vienna. At the time of his enrolment Gödel intended
to seek a degree in physics. But after a short while, impressed by the lectures of professors Philipp Furtwängler 
and Hans Hahn, he switched to mathematics. His remarkable talents soon attracted attention — so much so that just
two years after his matriculation he was invited to attend sessions of a discussion group that Hahn and philosopher 
Moritz Schlick had founded two years earlier. The group, which was later to become famous as the Vienna Circle, 
was inspired by the writings of Ernst Mach, a champion of rationalism who believed that all things could be 
explained by logic and empirical observation, without recourse to metaphysics.

The Circle brought Gödel into contact with scholars such as philosopher of science Rudolf Carnap and mathematician 
Karl Menger and helped to acquaint him with the literature of mathematical logic and philosophy. In particular, 
the Circle was immersed in the writings of Ludwig Wittgenstein, whose concern about the extent to which language 
can speak about language may have prompted Gödel to probe analogous questions about mathematics.

Gödel did not, however, share the positivistic philosophical outlook of the Circle, which extended Mach's ideas. 
Instead he was a Platonist: he believed that in addition to objects, there exists a world of concepts to which
humans have access by intuition. For Plato, who lived around 400 BC, concepts such as truth were not products of
the human mind which can change according to the thinker's point of view, as some philosophers believe, but existed
independently of the human observer. Thus, a statement could have a definite "truth value" — be true or not — 
whether or not it had been proved or could be empirically confirmed or refuted by humans. Gödel subscribed to 
this philosophy, and, in his own view, this was an aid to his remarkable mathematical insights.

Although Gödel was an attentive observer and clearly brilliant, he rarely contributed to the Circle's discussions, 
unless they were about mathematics. Shy and reclusive, he had few close friends. (He did, however, like the company 
of women and was apparently quite attractive to them.) After 1928 he seldom attended the group's meetings but 
became active instead in a mathematical colloquium organised by Menger.




