https://philosophy.berkeley.edu/graduate/logic

The Department of Philosophy has a vibrant graduate student community and offers many opportunities for graduate students
to collaborate and socialize, from informal reading groups to formal workshops and conferences. 
At the weekly meetings of the Richard Wollheim Society, graduate students present papers and get feedback from their peers. 
Students who have passed their qualifying examinations are encouraged to participate in a special seminar that meets weekly
to discuss dissertation work in progress. Many graduate students in the department participate in interdisciplinary working 
groups sponsored by the Townsend Center for the Humanities, including the Working Groups in Ancient Philosophy, Philosophy of Mind, 
and History and Philosophy of Logic, Mathematics and Science. And each spring, the philosophy departments at UC Berkeley, 
Stanford, and UC Davis co-sponsor a graduate student conference at which students from all three departments as well as other 
philosophy departments around California present and discuss papers on a wide variety of philosophical topics.

In addition, the department co-sponsors an annual graduate student conference with the University of London, 
with the location alternating between Berkeley and London. When the conference is in London, Berkeley sends six students
there (three as presenters, three as commentators); when the conference is in Berkeley, the situation is reversed. 
A faculty member from the visiting institution presents a keynote address. There are also possibilities for Berkeley graduate 
students to spend a semester in London during their graduate careers at Berkeley.



Berkeley-Stanford Circle in Logic and Philosophy
The Berkeley-Stanford Circle in Logic and Philosophy brings together graduate students from UC Berkeley and Stanford University 
to discuss research at the intersection of Logic and Philosophy.


https://philosophy.berkeley.edu/about
Philosophy at Berkeley

The Department of Philosophy at the University of California, Berkeley offers both a BA and a PhD in Philosophy.
In addition, we offer many courses for students who specialize in other disciplines, and we offer a lively series
of philosophical events. The faculty and graduate students have research interests covering the whole field of philosophy,
from antiquity to the present day, and represent both the analytic and continental traditions.
















